Deprecate the `.spec.purpose` field in the ControlPlane resource (#12161)
gardener/gardener: docs/extensions/resources/controlplane-exposure.md

title: ControlPlane Exposure
---

> > **⚠️ Disclaimer:** The `ControlPlane` resource with purpose `exposure` is deprecated and will be removed in a future Gardener release. Since the enablement of SNI, the `exposure` purpose is no longer used.

Reviewer: Please specify a concrete version number instead of "future Gardener release"

Reviewer 2: The recommendation in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.119.0/docs/development/process.md#deprecations-and-backwards-compatibility for our use case (removal of a field from resource in the `extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1` API group) is to have a deprecation period of at least 9 releases.

However, I think it should be safe to remove the field in 3 releases because:
- Practically, SNI is unconditionally enabled since years and gardenlet no longer deploys ControlPlane with `purpose=exposure`. Hence, there are no ControlPlane resources with purpose=exposure in the systems.
- ControlPlane with purpose=nil is correctly interpret by extensions as purpose=normal. For example, the `HasPurpose` predicate: https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/574fa7aa0b36ff615c0873492eb0da8e5fef963e/extensions/pkg/predicate/predicate.go#L83.
Hence, extensions should not fail/panic if the purpose field gets removed (the purpose field will be nil).

WDYT?

Author: At least from my point of view (and testing locally the removal of the field) we are safe to remove in 3 releases.

> > **⚠️ Disclaimer:** The `ControlPlane` resource with purpose `exposure` is deprecated and will be removed in a future Gardener release. Since the enablement of SNI, the `exposure` purpose is no longer used.

Reviewer 2: I know that I suggested you the deprecation message from https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/11372/files. 🙈 
However, now going over it again, we could make use of the [new GitHub syntax for notes](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/16925):

```suggestion
> [!WARNING]
> The `ControlPlane` resource with purpose `exposure` is deprecated and will be removed in Gardener v1.123. Since the enablement of SNI, the `exposure` purpose is no longer used.
```

> > **⚠️ Disclaimer:** The `ControlPlane` resource with purpose `exposure` is deprecated and will be removed in a future Gardener release. Since the enablement of SNI, the `exposure` purpose is no longer used.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to also deprecate the following funcs from the extension library: 
- the [`HasPurpose`](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/574fa7aa0b36ff615c0873492eb0da8e5fef963e/extensions/pkg/predicate/predicate.go#L83) predicate
- the [`GetControlPlaneExposureChartValues`](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/fbf76ed4ec25c1d675715566b503ed13d521d3bd/extensions/pkg/controller/controlplane/genericactuator/actuator.go#L52) func from the ValuesProvider interface

?

I know that you already prepared changes to remove this funcs but it might make sense to have them deprecated first before we remove them. 🤔 

This comment is only related to funcs/usages from the extension library.
